README.md, before:

# NOAA Oracle

A data pipeline system that fetches weather data from NOAA and serves it via a REST API with DLC (Discreet Log Contract) attestation support.

- Live site: [4casttruth.win](https://www.4casttruth.win/)
- Feel free to pull the parquet files and use in your own data analysis

## Architecture

```
[NOAA API] <- [daemon] -> parquet files -> [oracle] <- parquet files <- [browser DuckDB]
```

**Components:**
- **daemon** - Background process that pulls data from NOAA, transforms it into parquet files, and pushes to the oracle
- **oracle** - REST API that stores parquet files, serves them via browser UI, and provides DLC attestation
- **ui** - Browser interface using DuckDB-WASM for client-side querying of parquet files
- **core** - Shared library for configuration loading and utilities

## Quick Start

### Using Nix (Recommended)

```bash
# Enter development shell
nix develop

# Build both binaries
cargo build --workspace

# Or use just commands
just build
```

### Running the Services

```bash
# Run daemon (fetches NOAA data)
just run-daemon

# Run oracle (serves data and API)
just run-oracle

# Run oracle with pre-existing weather data
just run-oracle-standalone /path/to/weather/data
```

## Configuration

Configuration follows XDG Base Directory Specification. Files are searched in order:

1. Environment variable (`ORACLE_CONFIG` / `DAEMON_CONFIG`)
2. Current directory (`./oracle.toml` / `./daemon.toml`)
3. XDG config (`~/.config/noaa-oracle/oracle.toml`)
4. System config (`/etc/noaa-oracle/oracle.toml`)

Example configurations are in the `config/` directory:
- `config/oracle.example.toml`
- `config/daemon.example.toml`

### Oracle Configuration

```toml
[oracle]
host = "127.0.0.1"
port = "9800"
log_level = "info"

# Path to weather data (parquet files)
weather_dir = "/var/lib/noaa-oracle/weather"

# Path to UI files
ui_path = "/var/lib/noaa-oracle/ui"

# Oracle private key for DLC attestation
oracle_private_key = "/etc/noaa-oracle/oracle.pem"
```

### Daemon Configuration

```toml
[daemon]
log_level = "info"

# Where to store downloaded parquet files
data_path = "/var/lib/noaa-oracle/data"

# Oracle endpoint to push files to
oracle_url = "http://localhost:9800"

# Fetch interval in seconds (default: 3600 = 1 hour)
fetch_interval = 3600
```

## NixOS Deployment

Add to your NixOS configuration:

```nix
{
  inputs.noaa-oracle.url = "github:tee8z/noaa-oracle";

  outputs = { self, nixpkgs, noaa-oracle, ... }: {
    nixosConfigurations.myhost = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
      modules = [
        noaa-oracle.nixosModules.default
        {
          services.noaa-oracle = {
            enable = true;
            oracle = {
              enable = true;
              host = "0.0.0.0";
              port = 9800;
            };
            daemon = {
              enable = true;
              fetchInterval = 3600;
            };
          };
        }
      ];
    };
  };
}
```

## Development

```bash
# Enter dev shell
nix develop

# Format code
just fmt

# Run clippy
just clippy

# Run tests
just test

# Build release
just release
```

## Data Sources

- **Observations**: [MADIS METAR](https://madis.ncep.noaa.gov/madis_metar.shtml) via [Aviation Weather API](https://aviationweather.gov/data/api/)
- **Forecasts**: [NOAA Graphical Forecasts](https://graphical.weather.gov/xml/rest.php)

Data is updated hourly by NOAA; the daemon respects this by fetching once per hour.

## Why This Architecture?

- No remote database needed - just a file server, cheap to run
- Client-side querying via DuckDB-WASM for flexible analysis
- Simple, decoupled components that scale independently
- Immutable data model (snapshots over time)

## License

MIT

Commit message:

fix: clean up readme and debug build

README.md, after:

# NOAA Oracle

A data pipeline system that fetches weather data from NOAA and serves it via a REST API with DLC (Discreet Log Contract) attestation support.

- Live site: [4casttruth.win](https://www.4casttruth.win/)
- Feel free to pull the parquet files and use in your own data analysis

## Architecture

```
[NOAA API] <- [daemon] -> parquet files -> [oracle] <- parquet files <- [browser DuckDB]
```

**Components:**
- **daemon** - Background process that pulls data from NOAA, transforms it into parquet files, and pushes to the oracle
- **oracle** - REST API that stores parquet files, serves them via browser UI, and provides DLC attestation
- **ui** - Browser interface using DuckDB-WASM for client-side querying of parquet files
- **core** - Shared library for configuration loading and utilities

## Quick Start

### Using Nix (Recommended)

```bash
# Enter development shell
nix develop

# Build both binaries
cargo build --workspace

# Or use just commands
just build
```

### Without Nix

The oracle crate links against the DuckDB C library. Download the library from [DuckDB releases](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb/releases) (e.g., `libduckdb-linux-amd64.zip`) and point to it:

```bash
# Extract and set environment variables
export DUCKDB_LIB_DIR=/path/to/libduckdb
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$DUCKDB_LIB_DIR:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
cargo build --workspace
```

Alternatively, use `--features oracle/bundled` to compile DuckDB from source (much slower build).

### Running the Services

```bash
# Run daemon (fetches NOAA data)
just run-daemon

# Run oracle (serves data and API)
just run-oracle

# Run oracle with pre-existing weather data
just run-oracle-standalone /path/to/weather/data
```

## Configuration

Configuration follows XDG Base Directory Specification. Files are searched in order:

1. Environment variable (`ORACLE_CONFIG` / `DAEMON_CONFIG`)
2. Current directory (`./oracle.toml` / `./daemon.toml`)
3. XDG config (`~/.config/noaa-oracle/oracle.toml`)
4. System config (`/etc/noaa-oracle/oracle.toml`)

Example configurations are in the `config/` directory:
- `config/oracle.example.toml`
- `config/daemon.example.toml`

### Oracle Configuration

```toml
[oracle]
host = "127.0.0.1"
port = "9800"
log_level = "info"

# Path to weather data (parquet files)
weather_dir = "/var/lib/noaa-oracle/weather"

# Path to UI files
ui_path = "/var/lib/noaa-oracle/ui"

# Oracle private key for DLC attestation
oracle_private_key = "/etc/noaa-oracle/oracle.pem"
```

### Daemon Configuration

```toml
[daemon]
log_level = "info"

# Where to store downloaded parquet files
data_path = "/var/lib/noaa-oracle/data"

# Oracle endpoint to push files to
oracle_url = "http://localhost:9800"

# Fetch interval in seconds (default: 3600 = 1 hour)
fetch_interval = 3600
```

## NixOS Deployment

Add to your NixOS configuration:

```nix
{
  inputs.noaa-oracle.url = "github:tee8z/noaa-oracle";

  outputs = { self, nixpkgs, noaa-oracle, ... }: {
    nixosConfigurations.myhost = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
      modules = [
        noaa-oracle.nixosModules.default
        {
          services.noaa-oracle = {
            enable = true;
            oracle = {
              enable = true;
              host = "0.0.0.0";
              port = 9800;
            };
            daemon = {
              enable = true;
              fetchInterval = 3600;
            };
          };
        }
      ];
    };
  };
}
```

## Development

```bash
# Enter dev shell
nix develop

# Format code
just fmt

# Run clippy
just clippy

# Run tests
just test

# Build release
just release
```

## Data Sources

- **Observations**: [MADIS METAR](https://madis.ncep.noaa.gov/madis_metar.shtml) via [Aviation Weather API](https://aviationweather.gov/data/api/)
- **Forecasts**: [NOAA Graphical Forecasts](https://graphical.weather.gov/xml/rest.php)

Data is updated hourly by NOAA; the daemon respects this by fetching once per hour.

## Why This Architecture?

- No remote database needed - just a file server, cheap to run
- Client-side querying via DuckDB-WASM for flexible analysis
- Simple, decoupled components that scale independently
- Immutable data model (snapshots over time)

## License

MIT
